gettingStartedAWS.md, before:

# Getting your machine set up to work with our files in AWS

1. Download and install the [AWS CLI tool (v2)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv2.html). There are different versions for Windows, Mac, Linux, and Docker.
    1. You may need to configure your [IAM](https://console.aws.amazon.com/iam/) (_identity access management_) for AWS if you haven't already done so...
    2. Once you have a rootkey or keyfile of some kind, _if the folder you're keeping it in is within this Git repo_, please remember to add that folder to your `.gitignore`.

## Getting your GitHub repo set up locally with your credentials

1. You'll want to clone the GitHub repo to your local machine. For our code to work equally well on everyone's machines, you'll want to have the same kind of folder structure in place. That includes
    + having credentials stored in a `.secrets` folder...
    + that is ignored by version control and ...
    + have the same key names for the relevant credentials.
Those are not hard-and-fast requirements, but once your setup deviates from this structure the commands are not guaranteed to work out of the box.

```bash
$ git clone git@github.com:TSSlade/teacherprints.git

$ mkdir teacherprints/.secrets

$ echo ".secrets/*" >> .gitignore

$ touch teacherprints/.secrets/aws_credentials.csv; cd teacherprints/.secrets

$ echo "nonAdmin-AccessKeyId=YourOtherKeyIDHereNoQuotes" >> aws_credentials.csv

$ echo "nonAdmin-SecretKey=YourOtherSecretKeyHereNoQuotes" >> aws_credentials.csv

$ touch .secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem

$ vim .secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem
```

### Create your PEM file

These instructions assume you have not already gotten your .pem file set up on your own. If you've already gotten it squared away and appropriately saved in the `.secrets` folder, you can skip this section.

1. Outside of vim, copy the contents of the PEM file (that I shared in Slack) into your buffer.
1. Back in vim, paste the contents of your buffer into the file.
    1. Via text insert mode:
        1. Type `i`
        1. Type `command+v` on a Mac or `control+v` on Windows to paste your buffer into vim
    1. Via normal mode:
        1. Type `command+shift+v` on a Mac or `TBD` on Windows to paste your buffer into vim
1. Write the file to disc: type `:w!`
1. Quit vim: type `:q` (`:q!` to quit without saving)

A little bit about vim for reference [here](https://irian.to/blogs/introduction-to-vim-modes/).

For SSH to use your .pem file we'll need to make sure that it not only isn't _publicly_ viewable, even your own user can only read it (but not write or execute). So next execute the command

```bash
$ chmod 400 .secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem
```

## Accessing the AWS workspace from your machine

For the moment, we'll have a shared AWS EC2 instance that we SSH into for the purposes of working on a more powerful machine than our own laptops.

If you have followed the instructions above about structuring your `.secrets` folder to contain the necessary credentials, the code below _should_ work as-is with only the indicated modifications. If it doesn't, please let me know.

1. Verify the EC2 instance you're targeting is, indeed, up and running. You can do this via the `Instance Console` in AWS.
    1. You'll need to have signed in to the [AWS Console](https://aws.amazon.com/). Remember:
1. If you run into some trouble, AWS documentation on connecting your instance via the command line [is here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AccessingInstancesLinux.html).

```bash
# From within the teacherprints root folder
$ ssh -i ".secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem" YourUserNameHere@ec2-3-23-90-91.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com`
```

### To create a new user within the cloud instance

By default, the `YourUserNameHere` value for an EC2 Ubuntu instance is `ubuntu`. It's best practice to have individual usernames for different users, though, so that's what we'll do. If the instructions below (cribbed from the [AWS documentation here](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/new-user-accounts-linux-instance/)) is confusing, please reach out.

**N.B.**: Usernames have already been created for the `teacherprints` core team members. The below is only necessary if you want to create another one.

```bash
# From any user within the superusers group (sudo-enabled)
# Create a new user; if no password desired append `--disabled-password`
# Not recommended to disable password for future sudo-enabled users
$ sudo adduser NewUserName

# Add the user to the sudo usergroup
$ sudo usermod -aG NewUserName

# Change to the NewUserName
$ sudo su - NewUserName

# Create a space for the authorized keys to live and add the public key
$ mkdir .ssh

$ chmod 700 .ssh

$ touch .ssh/authorized_keys

$ chmod 600 .ssh/authorized_keys

$ cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys
# `cat` is now ready to accept input from your buffer.
# Copy the public key into your buffer and `command+v` or `ctrl+v` to paste
# Input the `enter` key to terminate the line
# Input `ctrl+d` to tell cat you're done making inputs
```

Once the user has logged in as themselves, they should change their sudo pw

```bash
# While logged in as yourself
$ passwd
# Enter your old password to verify
# Enter your new password twice
```

## Setting up your SSH config to make it easier to connect to the remote machine

If you intend to be SSHing into multiple remote machines, it may make sense to set up a `config` file within your `~/.ssh` folder that allows you to initiate an SSH session with a full suite of configurations without needing to type them in yourself.

Our references for this section are posts from
+ Linuxize ([_Using the SSH Config File_](https://linuxize.com/post/using-the-ssh-config-file/))
+ CiberCiti.biz ([_OpenSSH Config File Examples_](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/create-ssh-config-file-on-linux-unix/))
+ [_SSH Can Do That? Productivity Tips for Working with Remote Servers_](http://blogs.perl.org/users/smylers/2011/08/ssh-productivity-tips.html)
+ Ubuntu's official documentation ([_SSH/OpenSSH/PortForwarding_](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/SSH/OpenSSH/PortForwarding))

1. If it does not already exist, create a `config` file within your `.ssh` folder.
    1. The `.ssh` folder will exist within your `HOME` if you have ever previously initiated an SSH session.
    1. If it's not there, create it first (`$ mkdir ~/.ssh`).
    ```bash
    $ touch ~/.ssh/config

    # update permissions so only the user can read, can write, can't execute
    $ chmod 600 ~/.ssh/config
    ```
1. Your config file will be laid out with keys (e.g., `Host`) separated from the values they take (e.g., `dev`) by a space: `Host dev`.
1. All the configurations that go together are grouped in what is called a _stanza_. It is good practice to indent all lines of the stanza save the first to make it clearer how everything fits together.
1. The file is read/interpreted from top to bottom. The first stanza matching the command you are issuing is the one that will take precedence.
1. The relevant portion of mine looks like this:
    ```bash
    # The name of the host you'll invoke with $ ssh <whatever>
    Host teacherprints
        # The Elastic IP that AWS will keep pointing at our EC2 instance
        Hostname 3.23.90.91
        # The username you're logging in with
        User tslade
        # The port to connect on
        Port 22
        IdentityFile path/to/my/pemfile/MyPemFile.pem
        GatewayPorts yes
        # Mapping ports for Jupyter, etc.
        LocalForward 8888 127.0.0.1:8888
        LocalForward 8889 127.0.0.1:8889
        LocalForward 8890 127.0.0.1:8890
        LocalForward 8891 127.0.0.1:8891
        LocalForward 8896 127.0.0.1:8896
        # Keeps the remote server alive for a while - helps if your connectivity is spotty
        ControlPersist 4h
        # Local portion of a config setting to allow GUIs to run off the remote server
        ForwardX11 yes
    ```
As a result of the above, now instead of typing in
```bash
$ ssh -i ".secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem" tslade@ec2-3-23-90-91.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com`
```
I can simply invoke
```bash
$ ssh teacherprints
```
...and I'm off to the races!

While defining my own `.ssh/config` file, I found these resources helpful:
+ [_Can tmux pane remote ssh-connection_](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10537206/can-tmux-pane-remote-ssh-connection)
+ [_Run tmux on ssh login_](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/552614/run-tmux-on-ssh-login)

## Working with shared folders from within our own HOME directories

The EC2 instance has a structure as follows:

```bash
$ cd /
$ tree -L 1
    .
    ├── bin
    ├── boot
    ├── dev
    ├── etc
    ├── home # <-- This is where the magic happens
    ├── lib
    ├── lib64
    ├── media
    ├── meta
    ├── mnt
    ├── opt
    ├── proc
    ├── root
    ├── run
    ├── sbin
    ├── snap
    ├── srv
    ├── sys
    ├── tmp
    ├── usr
    ├── var
    └── writable

$ tree -L 1 home
    home
    ├── ajacobson
    ├── kdarnell
    ├── lmoore
    ├── projects # <-- This is where the GitHub repo and shared files will live
    ├── tslade
    └── ubuntu

$ tree -L 1 home/projects
    home/projects
    └── teacherprints
```

It would be a bit of a pain to always need to back up out your user's `HOME` directory to get to the relevant folders. If you create a symlink to the folder within your own `HOME`, it can be a bit easier to work with.

```bash
~$ pwd
# /home/tslade

# Make a symbolic link to the common folder and name it something helpful
~$ ln -s /home/projects tslade-projects
~$ ls -l
# total 4
# drwxr-xr-x 3 tslade tslade 4096 May 31 04:12 snap
# lrwxrwxrwx 1 tslade tslade   14 May 31 04:45 tslade-projects -> /home/projects

~$ cd tslade-projects

# Let's verify it contains what we expect it to
~/tslade-projects$ ls -l
# total 4
# drwxrwxr-x 5 tslade tslade 4096 May 31 04:31 teacherprints

# If all worked as planned, the output of the next command should match the above
~/tslade-projects$  ls -l /home/projects
# total 4
# drwxrwxr-x 5 tslade tslade 4096 May 31 04:31 teacherprints

# It does! Success.
```

## Other notes

In the event you use SSH for communication with GitHub and you're not able to make commits to the repo or clone it, the instructions at [_How to use SSH keys for authentication_](https://upcloud.com/community/tutorials/use-ssh-keys-authentication/) can help sort you out.

Commit message:

Added text to clear confusion re: header section

gettingStartedAWS.md, after:

# Getting your machine set up to work with our files in AWS

I think this top section will still be relevant, but for the moment it's not critical. Feel free to skip it for now and move on to the next section.
1. Download and install the [AWS CLI tool (v2)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv2.html). There are different versions for Windows, Mac, Linux, and Docker.
    1. You may need to configure your [IAM](https://console.aws.amazon.com/iam/) (_identity access management_) for AWS if you haven't already done so...
    2. Once you have a rootkey or keyfile of some kind, _if the folder you're keeping it in is within this Git repo_, please remember to add that folder to your `.gitignore`.

## Getting your GitHub repo set up locally with your credentials

1. You'll want to clone the GitHub repo to your local machine. For our code to work equally well on everyone's machines, you'll want to have the same kind of folder structure in place. That includes
    + having credentials stored in a `.secrets` folder...
    + that is ignored by version control and ...
    + have the same key names for the relevant credentials.
Those are not hard-and-fast requirements, but once your setup deviates from this structure the commands are not guaranteed to work out of the box.

```bash
$ git clone git@github.com:TSSlade/teacherprints.git

$ mkdir teacherprints/.secrets

$ echo ".secrets/*" >> .gitignore

$ touch teacherprints/.secrets/aws_credentials.csv; cd teacherprints/.secrets

$ echo "nonAdmin-AccessKeyId=YourOtherKeyIDHereNoQuotes" >> aws_credentials.csv

$ echo "nonAdmin-SecretKey=YourOtherSecretKeyHereNoQuotes" >> aws_credentials.csv

$ touch .secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem

$ vim .secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem
```

### Create your PEM file

These instructions assume you have not already gotten your .pem file set up on your own. If you've already gotten it squared away and appropriately saved in the `.secrets` folder, you can skip this section.

1. Outside of vim, copy the contents of the PEM file (that I shared in Slack) into your buffer.
1. Back in vim, paste the contents of your buffer into the file.
    1. Via text insert mode:
        1. Type `i`
        1. Type `command+v` on a Mac or `control+v` on Windows to paste your buffer into vim
    1. Via normal mode:
        1. Type `command+shift+v` on a Mac or `TBD` on Windows to paste your buffer into vim
1. Write the file to disc: type `:w!`
1. Quit vim: type `:q` (`:q!` to quit without saving)

A little bit about vim for reference [here](https://irian.to/blogs/introduction-to-vim-modes/).

For SSH to use your .pem file we'll need to make sure that it not only isn't _publicly_ viewable, even your own user can only read it (but not write or execute). So next execute the command

```bash
$ chmod 400 .secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem
```

## Accessing the AWS workspace from your machine

For the moment, we'll have a shared AWS EC2 instance that we SSH into for the purposes of working on a more powerful machine than our own laptops.

If you have followed the instructions above about structuring your `.secrets` folder to contain the necessary credentials, the code below _should_ work as-is with only the indicated modifications. If it doesn't, please let me know.

1. Verify the EC2 instance you're targeting is, indeed, up and running. You can do this via the `Instance Console` in AWS.
    1. You'll need to have signed in to the [AWS Console](https://aws.amazon.com/). Remember:
1. If you run into some trouble, AWS documentation on connecting your instance via the command line [is here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/AccessingInstancesLinux.html).

```bash
# From within the teacherprints root folder
$ ssh -i ".secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem" YourUserNameHere@ec2-3-23-90-91.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com`
```

### To create a new user within the cloud instance

By default, the `YourUserNameHere` value for an EC2 Ubuntu instance is `ubuntu`. It's best practice to have individual usernames for different users, though, so that's what we'll do. If the instructions below (cribbed from the [AWS documentation here](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/new-user-accounts-linux-instance/)) is confusing, please reach out.

**N.B.**: Usernames have already been created for the `teacherprints` core team members. The below is only necessary if you want to create another one.

```bash
# From any user within the superusers group (sudo-enabled)
# Create a new user; if no password desired append `--disabled-password`
# Not recommended to disable password for future sudo-enabled users
$ sudo adduser NewUserName

# Add the user to the sudo usergroup
$ sudo usermod -aG NewUserName

# Change to the NewUserName
$ sudo su - NewUserName

# Create a space for the authorized keys to live and add the public key
$ mkdir .ssh

$ chmod 700 .ssh

$ touch .ssh/authorized_keys

$ chmod 600 .ssh/authorized_keys

$ cat >> .ssh/authorized_keys
# `cat` is now ready to accept input from your buffer.
# Copy the public key into your buffer and `command+v` or `ctrl+v` to paste
# Input the `enter` key to terminate the line
# Input `ctrl+d` to tell cat you're done making inputs
```

Once the user has logged in as themselves, they should change their sudo pw

```bash
# While logged in as yourself
$ passwd
# Enter your old password to verify
# Enter your new password twice
```

## Setting up your SSH config to make it easier to connect to the remote machine

If you intend to be SSHing into multiple remote machines, it may make sense to set up a `config` file within your `~/.ssh` folder that allows you to initiate an SSH session with a full suite of configurations without needing to type them in yourself.

Our references for this section are posts from
+ Linuxize ([_Using the SSH Config File_](https://linuxize.com/post/using-the-ssh-config-file/))
+ CiberCiti.biz ([_OpenSSH Config File Examples_](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/create-ssh-config-file-on-linux-unix/))
+ [_SSH Can Do That? Productivity Tips for Working with Remote Servers_](http://blogs.perl.org/users/smylers/2011/08/ssh-productivity-tips.html)
+ Ubuntu's official documentation ([_SSH/OpenSSH/PortForwarding_](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/SSH/OpenSSH/PortForwarding))

1. If it does not already exist, create a `config` file within your `.ssh` folder.
    1. The `.ssh` folder will exist within your `HOME` if you have ever previously initiated an SSH session.
    1. If it's not there, create it first (`$ mkdir ~/.ssh`).
    ```bash
    $ touch ~/.ssh/config

    # update permissions so only the user can read, can write, can't execute
    $ chmod 600 ~/.ssh/config
    ```
1. Your config file will be laid out with keys (e.g., `Host`) separated from the values they take (e.g., `dev`) by a space: `Host dev`.
1. All the configurations that go together are grouped in what is called a _stanza_. It is good practice to indent all lines of the stanza save the first to make it clearer how everything fits together.
1. The file is read/interpreted from top to bottom. The first stanza matching the command you are issuing is the one that will take precedence.
1. The relevant portion of mine looks like this:
    ```bash
    # The name of the host you'll invoke with $ ssh <whatever>
    Host teacherprints
        # The Elastic IP that AWS will keep pointing at our EC2 instance
        Hostname 3.23.90.91
        # The username you're logging in with
        User tslade
        # The port to connect on
        Port 22
        IdentityFile path/to/my/pemfile/MyPemFile.pem
        GatewayPorts yes
        # Mapping ports for Jupyter, etc.
        LocalForward 8888 127.0.0.1:8888
        LocalForward 8889 127.0.0.1:8889
        LocalForward 8890 127.0.0.1:8890
        LocalForward 8891 127.0.0.1:8891
        LocalForward 8896 127.0.0.1:8896
        # Keeps the remote server alive for a while - helps if your connectivity is spotty
        ControlPersist 4h
        # Local portion of a config setting to allow GUIs to run off the remote server
        ForwardX11 yes
    ```
As a result of the above, now instead of typing in
```bash
$ ssh -i ".secrets/teacherprints-ec2.pem" tslade@ec2-3-23-90-91.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com`
```
I can simply invoke
```bash
$ ssh teacherprints
```
...and I'm off to the races!

While defining my own `.ssh/config` file, I found these resources helpful:
+ [_Can tmux pane remote ssh-connection_](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/10537206/can-tmux-pane-remote-ssh-connection)
+ [_Run tmux on ssh login_](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/552614/run-tmux-on-ssh-login)

## Working with shared folders from within our own HOME directories

The EC2 instance has a structure as follows:

```bash
$ cd /
$ tree -L 1
    .
    ├── bin
    ├── boot
    ├── dev
    ├── etc
    ├── home # <-- This is where the magic happens
    ├── lib
    ├── lib64
    ├── media
    ├── meta
    ├── mnt
    ├── opt
    ├── proc
    ├── root
    ├── run
    ├── sbin
    ├── snap
    ├── srv
    ├── sys
    ├── tmp
    ├── usr
    ├── var
    └── writable

$ tree -L 1 home
    home
    ├── ajacobson
    ├── kdarnell
    ├── lmoore
    ├── projects # <-- This is where the GitHub repo and shared files will live
    ├── tslade
    └── ubuntu

$ tree -L 1 home/projects
    home/projects
    └── teacherprints
```

It would be a bit of a pain to always need to back up out your user's `HOME` directory to get to the relevant folders. If you create a symlink to the folder within your own `HOME`, it can be a bit easier to work with.

```bash
~$ pwd
# /home/tslade

# Make a symbolic link to the common folder and name it something helpful
~$ ln -s /home/projects tslade-projects
~$ ls -l
# total 4
# drwxr-xr-x 3 tslade tslade 4096 May 31 04:12 snap
# lrwxrwxrwx 1 tslade tslade   14 May 31 04:45 tslade-projects -> /home/projects

~$ cd tslade-projects

# Let's verify it contains what we expect it to
~/tslade-projects$ ls -l
# total 4
# drwxrwxr-x 5 tslade tslade 4096 May 31 04:31 teacherprints

# If all worked as planned, the output of the next command should match the above
~/tslade-projects$  ls -l /home/projects
# total 4
# drwxrwxr-x 5 tslade tslade 4096 May 31 04:31 teacherprints

# It does! Success.
```

## Other notes

In the event you use SSH for communication with GitHub and you're not able to make commits to the repo or clone it, the instructions at [_How to use SSH keys for authentication_](https://upcloud.com/community/tutorials/use-ssh-keys-authentication/) can help sort you out.
